Radcliffe Metanalysis Experimental Design Metadata
These data were compiled from multiple experimental studies that manipulated temperature (and in some cases precipitation as well) and monitored phenology. 
The data were generously shared by authors of the experiments and should only be used by members of the Radcliffe “Predicting Future Springs” Working Group 
for purposes outlined in the working group. 
Contact Ailene Ettinger or Lizzie Wolkovich if you would like to use the data for other purposes.
aettinger@fas.harvard.edu, wolkovich@fas.harvard.edu

This file provides details on experimental design and set-up of each experiment included.

1) PRICE
Source: M.V. PRICE & N.M. WASER."EFFECTS OF EXPERIMENTAL WARMING ON PLANT REPRODUCTIVE PHENOLOGY IN A SUBALPINE MEADOW"
Ecology, 79(4), 1998, pp. 1261–1271.
Plot design: 
10 plots, 3m X 10m in size and separated by >2m, were established in an alpine meadow at RMBL.
Plots numbered consequetively and odd-numbered plots were heated by electric heaters suspended 2.5 m above them.

Heating Method:
Parabolic reflectors were installed above the heating elements and caused "nearly uniform delivery of 15 W/m2 of 
IR radiation over the central 80% of each warmed plot, 5 W/m2 at the periphery and in a central band between the heaters, 
and no additional radiation to neighboring control plots."
Heaters activated in January 1991 and operated continuously. In May 1993 a third heater was added to each warmed plot, raising the incident IR flux to 22 W/m2 and removing the central ‘‘cold spot.’’

Soil temperature measurements:
Thermocouples were buried 5, 12, and 25 cm deep at three positions in each plot, recorded temperature every 2 h.

2) MARCHIN
Source: R.M. MARCHIN, C.F. SALK, W.A. HOFFMANN & R.R. DUNN. "Temperature alone does not explain phenological variation of diverse 
temperate plants under experimental warming." Global Change Biology (2015) 21, 3138–3151
Plot design: 
15 plots in forest understory: 9 heated chambers,3 unheated control chambers ("shams"), and 3 control plots with no chambers 
octagonal open-top chambers have a volume of 21.7 m3 (5 m in diameter, 1.2 m wall height) 

Heating Method:
Forced air blown over hydronic radiators fed by a closed-loop mixture of hot water and propylene glycol (antifreeze).
Unheated chambers had same forced air delivery system minus the radiators. 
chambers heated year-round, both day and night. 
Regression design of chamber heating: each chamber heated to target of 1.5–5.5 °C above ambient temperature, with 0.5 °C increments between chambers. 

Air temperature measurements:
2 temperature probes per chamber at 22 cm above ground level

Soil temperature measurements:
2 sensors buried at 2 cm and 2 sensors buried 6 cm below groundsurface

Other measurements:
Relative humidity (HS-2000V capacitive polymer sensor; Precon, Memphis, TN, USA) measured ever minute, recorded as hourly means by dataloggers

Soil moisture (Model CS616 TDR probes, Campbell Scientific Inc., Logan, UT, USA) measured ever minute, recorded as hourly means by dataloggers
Photosynthetically active radiation (PAR; Model SQ110; Apogee Instruments Inc., Logan, UT, USA) were measured inside each
experimental chamber every minute and recorded as hourly
means by automated dataloggers (CR1000; Campbell Scientific
Inc.). 

3) BACE
Source: Jeff Dukes, jsdukes@purdue.edu
Plot design: 
4 blocks, each with 12 plots with fully crossed warming (4 levels, including ambient) and precipitation (3 levels, including ambient, reduction, and addition)

Heating Method:
infrared above-canopy heating of: ambient temperature, low (target of +1:0 C), medium (+2:7 C), and high warming (+4:0 C)

Precipitation Treatment:
drought= 50% reduction, using rainout shelters
high precip=150%

4) CLARK DUKE & HARVARD
Source: J.S. Clark,C. Salk, J. Melillo & J. Mohan. "Tree phenology responses to winter chilling, spring
warming, at north and south range limits." Functional Ecology 2014, 28, 1344–1355.

Plot design: 
18 17-m2 rectangular open-top chambers per site at 2 sites (Duke Forest and Harvard Forest) established in deciduous forest
in a factorial design with three temperatures (ambient, +3 °C, +5 °C assigned randomly)
Within each chamber, two 4.6 m 9 1.05 m areas were designated as ‘experimental strips’ for soil heating and seed establishment.. Chamber walls are transparent plastic greenhouse sheeting attached to wooden frames, with heights of 2.5 m. 

3 additional control plots per site had no chamber ("ambient" in our meta-analysis) 
unheated chambers received buried cables as a disturbance control and air circulating through these chambers was not heated.

Half of chambers at each site (n=9) were located in artificial gaps (plot names beginning with "G") created in 2008 and half were located in intact-canopy stands (plot names beging with "S")

Heating Method:
Soil and air heated with independent systems to track ambient temperatures with the consistent +3 °C and +5 °C offsets.
Soil heated with electric resistance cable buried 10 cm deep at 20-cm spacing. Temperature offsets were
maintained by an automated tracking system. 
Air heated indirectly with propane. Heated water with non-toxic propylene glycol was pumped to a heat-exchange coil
and airflow system in +3 and +5 chambers.  The temperature offset maintained by a defined heat delivery rate. 
Harvard site not heated from December through March when snow-cover present.

Soil temperature measured 10 cm deep
Air temperatures measured 30 cm above-ground

4) FORCE
Source: C.R. ROLLINSON & M.W. KAYE. "Experimental warming alters spring phenology of certain plant functional groups in an early successional forest community." Global Change Biology (2012) 18, 1108–1116

Plot design: 
16  2x2 m plots established in a two-factorial randomized complete block design in cleared deciduous forest site
4 blocks with one plot of each of the following treatments: warming only, precipitation only, warming + precipitation, and ambient.
Plots treated from May 2008 through August 2010, spaced a minimum of 10 m apart to minimize the effects of neighboring treatments 

Heating method:
Plots were warmed with suspended infrared heaters, with target temperature increases above ambient of 1.5 °C during the day and 3 °C at night.  
One 240 V infrared heater was suspended 1.5 m above each plot. A real-time proportional-integrative-derivative
feedback system controlled warming through infrared radiometer (IRR) monitoring of surface temperatures in
warmed and not warmed plots. 
Ambient and precipitation only plots that did not receive warming treatments had heater replicas to replicate shading and drip-line effects of the lamp structures in warmed plots.
Precipitaiton treatments:
Weekly additions of collected rainwater or snow that equaled 20% of the 1882–2005 monthly mean historical record from State College, PA (US Historical Climatology Data Network, Easterling et al., 1996). "April through December precipitation treatments were added in the form of water collected in a series of rainwater catchments distributed throughout the site. In winter months (December–March), precipitation was collected in a series of open topped plastic bins and distributed as water, ice, or snow, depending on the state at time of application." 


